README.md, before:

# Anand's Talks

- 21 Aug 2025. **[AI Coding Guide](2025-08-21-ai-coding-guide/ ":ignore")** at [DataHack Summit](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/datahacksummit/), Bangalore
- 21 Aug 2025. **[RIP Data Scientists](2025-08-21-rip-data-scientists/ ":ignore")** at [DataHack Summit](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/datahacksummit/), Bangalore
- 11 Aug 2025. **[Social Code Analysis](2025-08-11-social-code-analysis/ ":ignore")** at [PyConSG Education Summit 2025](https://pycon.sg/edusummit.html), Singapore
- 23 Jul 2025. **[Solving Industrial Problems with Live Coding](2025-07-23-supply-chain-automl/ ":ignore")** at [AWS Innovation Day](https://pages.awscloud.com/aws-mfg-industrial-suppy-chain-innovation-day.html), Singapore
- 13 Jul 2025. **[Goodbye MBA, Hello AI](2025-07-13-goodbye-mba-hello-ai/ ":ignore")** at [DoMS, IITM](https://doms.iitm.ac.in/), Chennai
- 28 Jun 2025. **[Prompt-to-Plot](2025-06-28-prompt-to-plot/ ":ignore")** at [VizChitra](https://vizchitra.com/), Bangalore
- 27 Jun 2025. **[Data Design by Dialogue](2025-06-27-data-design-by-dialogue/ ":ignore")** at [VizChitra](https://vizchitra.com/), Bangalore
- 19 Jun 2025. **[Cool LLM CLI Python uses](2025-06-pycon-sg/llm-cli.md)** at [PyCon Singapore](https://pycon.sg/)
- 18 Jun 2025. **[Python in the Browser](2025-06-pycon-sg/ ":ignore")** at [PyCon Singapore](https://pycon.sg/)
- 10 May 2025. **Vibe Coding** at [SETU](https://setuschool.com/) [⏯️ Video](https://youtu.be/ODXSDbY12dg) [💬 Transcript](2025-05-10-vibe-coding/)
- 17 Feb 2011: **Python Imaging**. [🖥️ Code](python-imaging/index.html)
- 28 Jan 2011: **Learning R** at [Datameet](http://www.datameet.org/).
  [📋 Slides](https://github.com/sanand0/talks/releases/download/talks/2011-01-28-datameet-learning-r.pptx)
  [🎤 Audio](https://github.com/sanand0/talks/releases/download/talks/2011-01-28-datameet-learning-r.mp3)

<!--

Some talks are slides, audio, etc.
These are at https://github.com/sanand0/talks/releases/tag/talks

Created via: `gh release create talks --title "Talks"`

To add content:

```bash
gh release upload talks --clobber $FILENAME
```

-->

Commit message:

Add talk: DuckDB is the new Pandas

README.md, after:

# Anand's Talks

- 13 Aug 2025. **[DuckDB is the new Pandas](2025-09-13-duckdb-is-the-new-pandas/ ":ignore")** at [PyCon India 2025](https://cfp.in.pycon.org/2025/talk/W8VJX3/), Bangalore
- 21 Aug 2025. **[AI Coding Guide](2025-08-21-ai-coding-guide/ ":ignore")** at [DataHack Summit](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/datahacksummit/), Bangalore
- 21 Aug 2025. **[RIP Data Scientists](2025-08-21-rip-data-scientists/ ":ignore")** at [DataHack Summit](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/datahacksummit/), Bangalore
- 11 Aug 2025. **[Social Code Analysis](2025-08-11-social-code-analysis/ ":ignore")** at [PyConSG Education Summit 2025](https://pycon.sg/edusummit.html), Singapore
- 23 Jul 2025. **[Solving Industrial Problems with Live Coding](2025-07-23-supply-chain-automl/ ":ignore")** at [AWS Innovation Day](https://pages.awscloud.com/aws-mfg-industrial-suppy-chain-innovation-day.html), Singapore
- 13 Jul 2025. **[Goodbye MBA, Hello AI](2025-07-13-goodbye-mba-hello-ai/ ":ignore")** at [DoMS, IITM](https://doms.iitm.ac.in/), Chennai
- 28 Jun 2025. **[Prompt-to-Plot](2025-06-28-prompt-to-plot/ ":ignore")** at [VizChitra](https://vizchitra.com/), Bangalore
- 27 Jun 2025. **[Data Design by Dialogue](2025-06-27-data-design-by-dialogue/ ":ignore")** at [VizChitra](https://vizchitra.com/), Bangalore
- 19 Jun 2025. **[Cool LLM CLI Python uses](2025-06-pycon-sg/llm-cli.md)** at [PyCon Singapore](https://pycon.sg/)
- 18 Jun 2025. **[Python in the Browser](2025-06-pycon-sg/ ":ignore")** at [PyCon Singapore](https://pycon.sg/)
- 10 May 2025. **Vibe Coding** at [SETU](https://setuschool.com/) [⏯️ Video](https://youtu.be/ODXSDbY12dg) [💬 Transcript](2025-05-10-vibe-coding/)
- 17 Feb 2011: **Python Imaging**. [🖥️ Code](python-imaging/index.html)
- 28 Jan 2011: **Learning R** at [Datameet](http://www.datameet.org/).
  [📋 Slides](https://github.com/sanand0/talks/releases/download/talks/2011-01-28-datameet-learning-r.pptx)
  [🎤 Audio](https://github.com/sanand0/talks/releases/download/talks/2011-01-28-datameet-learning-r.mp3)

<!--

Some talks are slides, audio, etc.
These are at https://github.com/sanand0/talks/releases/tag/talks

Created via: `gh release create talks --title "Talks"`

To add content:

```bash
gh release upload talks --clobber $FILENAME
```

-->
